Draft RFC Self-Sovereign Verifiable PayID (#39)
payid-org/rfcs: src/spec/verifiable-payid-protocol-NC.md

---
coding: utf-8

title: Verifiable PayID Protocol for Non-Custodial Services
docname: draft-aanchal-verifiable-payid-protocol-ext-01
category: std

pi: [toc, sortrefs, symrefs, comments]
smart_quotes: off

area: security
author:

  -
    ins: A. Malhotra
    name: Aanchal Malhotra
    org: Ripple
    street: 315 Montgomery Street
    city: San Francisco
    region: CA
    code: 94104
    country: US
    phone: -----------------
    email: amalhotra@ripple.com
    uri: https://www.ripple.com

  -
    ins: D. Schwartz
    name: David Schwartz
    org: Ripple
    street: 315 Montgomery Street
    city: San Francisco
    region: CA
    code: 94104
    country: US
    phone: -----------------
    email: david@ripple.com
    uri: https://www.ripple.com

normative:
    RFC2119:
    RFC2818:
    RFC5280:
    RFC6979:

>     RFC7515:

Reviewer: Depending on the resolutions of my comments at the bottom of this document, we _may_ be missing RFC-7519 (JWT). 

Also, references should be sorted in ascending order (from the top to the bottom). E.g., 

```
...
RFC7515:
RFC7517:
RFC7519:
...
```

Author: Done.

--- middle

# Terminology
   This protocol can be referred to as `Self-Sovereign Verifiable PayID`. It uses the following terminology.

   * Endpoint: either the client or the server of a connection.
   * Sender: individual or entity originating a transaction. 
   * PayID client: the endpoint that initiates PayID protocol/sending side of the transaction.
   * PayID server: the endpoint that returns payment account(s) address information in response to a PayID protocol request (non-custodial wallets, exchanges, etc).
   * PayID owner: individual or entity receiving a transaction. 
   * Digital Signture: As defined in [RFC4949][].

   The key words "MUST", "MUST NOT", "REQUIRED", "SHALL", "SHALL NOT", "SHOULD", "SHOULD NOT", "RECOMMENDED", "NOT RECOMMENDED", "MAY", and "OPTIONAL" in this document are to be interpreted as described in [RFC2119][] and [RFC9174][].

# Motivation

> 

Reviewer 2: @aanchal4

>    We anticipate that the most common use-case for retrieving the payment account(s) address information is to make transactions. Providers of such services can be categorized as custodial and non-custodial, each of which operate under different security models. Non-custodial wallets/exchanges do not store their customers’ on-ledger private keys on their servers. Instead, these customers hold their private keys and hence are in full control of their funds. As such, there is no trust requirement between non-custodial wallets/exchanges and their customers, and these services are not responsible for any for lost, compromised or stolen private keys of their customers. Likewise, customers of non-custodial wallets/exchanges do not need to worry if the servers of those wallets/exchanges go malicious or are compromised.

Reviewer: Echoing this one-sentence change from the original PR -- I still think my suggestion is an improvement because us anticipating that "payments will be the most common use-case" doesn't really matter for this protocol/rfc. The efficacy of the protocol still stands if we were to assume some other common use-case, or none at all (also some minor grammatical edits in last few sentences).

```suggestion
   Providers of PayID-enabled payment services can be broadly categorized as custodial and non-custodial, each of which operate under different security models. Non-custodial wallets/exchanges do not store their customers’ on-ledger private keys on their servers. Instead, these customers hold their private keys and hence are in full control of their funds. As such, there is no trust requirement between non-custodial wallets/exchanges and their customers, and these services are not responsible for any for lost, compromised or stolen private keys of their customers. Likewise, customers of non-custodial wallets/exchanges do not need to worry if the servers of those wallets/exchanges are compromised.
```
```

# Verifiable PayID Protocol for Non-Custodial Services Specification
  The Verifiable PayID protocol is designed along the same design principles as [PAYID-PROTOCOL][].

## PaymentInformation Resource as JSON Web Signatures
  The PayID Protocol [PAYID-PROTOCOL] defines a Payment Account(s) Information Resource that contains information about a particular PayID. This document further refines this definition to allow this information to be digitally signed, and then represented as a JSON Web Signature (JWS) [RFC7515] using JWS JSON Serialization.

  Below, this document further defines the structure of each JWS component, for the purposes of Verifiable PayID.

### JOSE Protected Header
  For JWS, the members of the JSON object represented by the JOSE Header describe the cryptographic operations applied to the JWS Protected header and the JWS payload and optionally additional properties of the JWS.

>   For a complete list of members of this object, refer to [RFC7519][] and [RFC7515][]. Following is an example of a JWT object representing JOSE header parameters for JWS JSON Serialization syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For a complete list of members of this object, refer to [RFC7515][]. Following is an example of a JWT object representing JOSE header parameters for JWS JSON Serialization syntax.
```

I may be missing something, but isn't everything about this defined in RFC7515 (JWS)? I suppose it's _actually_ defined in RFC-7517 (JWK) but it seems sufficient to only list 7515 here (?)

In any event, I don't think RFC-7519 (JWT) is involved here (correct me if I'm wrong though).

Author: RFC 7519 is a subset of RFC 7515. So I can remove that reference.

    {
           "name": "identityKey",
           "alg" : "ES256K", 
           "typ" : "JOSE+JSON",
           "b64" : false,
           "crit": ["b64"],
           "jwk" :  {
                "kty": "EC",
                "use": "sig",
                "crv": "secp256k1", 
                "x"  : "0", 
                "y"  : "0",

>                     },

Reviewer: ```suggestion
            },
```

    }

#### name
The `name` Header Parameter identifies the type of signature. It is a new OPTIONAL header parameter that is not defined in the IANA JSON Web Signature and Encryption Header Parameters Registry.

#### alg

> The "alg" (algorithm) Header Parameter identifies the cryptographic algorithm used to secure the JWS. This is a required field as described in [RFC7515][]. We RECOMMEND using "ES256K" which is Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) using secp256k1 curve-type and SHA-256 hash-type as defined in IANA JSON Web Signature and Encryption Header Parameters Registry.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `alg` (algorithm) Header Parameter identifies the cryptographic algorithm used to secure the JWS. This is a required field as described in [RFC7515][]. We RECOMMEND using "ES256K" which is Elliptic Curve Digital Signature Algorithm (ECDSA) using secp256k1 curve-type and SHA-256 hash-type as defined in IANA JSON Web Signature and Encryption Header Parameters Registry.
```

#### typ

> The "typ" (type) Header Parameter is used by JWS applications to declare the media type of the complete JWS. This is an optional field as described in [RFC7515][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `typ` (type) Header Parameter is used by JWS applications to declare the media type of the complete JWS. This is an optional field as described in [RFC7515][].
```

#### b64

> The "b64" (base64url-encode) Header Parameter is an extension to JWS specification that determines how a payload is represented in the JWS and the JWS signing input. When the "b64" value is `false`, the payload is represented simply as the JWS Payload value with no encoding; otherwise, it is represented as ASCII(BASE64URL(JWS Payload)). This is an optional field as described in [RFC7797][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `b64` (base64url-encode) Header Parameter is an extension to JWS specification that determines how a payload is represented in the JWS and the JWS signing input. When the "b64" value is `false`, the payload is represented simply as the JWS Payload value with no encoding; otherwise, it is represented as ASCII(BASE64URL(JWS Payload)). This is an optional field as described in [RFC7797][].
```

#### crit

> The "crit" (critical) Header Parameter indicates that extensions to JWS specification are being used that MUST be understood and processed. This is a required field to be used with "b64" parameter as described in [RFC7797][].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `crit` (critical) Header Parameter indicates that extensions to JWS specification are being used that MUST be understood and processed. This is a required field to be used with "b64" parameter as described in [RFC7797][].
```

#### jwk 

> The "jwk" (JSON Web Key) Header Parameter represents the public key that is used to digitally sign the JOSE header and JWS payload. This parameter is represented as a JSON Web Key as specified in [RFC7517][]. In the header above, members of "jwk" represent the properties of the public key, including its value that corresponds to the algorithm "ES256K".

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `jwk` (JSON Web Key) Header Parameter represents the public key that is used to digitally sign the JOSE header and JWS payload. This parameter is represented as a JSON Web Key as specified in [RFC7517][]. In the header above, members of "jwk" represent the properties of the public key, including its value that corresponds to the algorithm "ES256K".
```

>   * kty: The "kty" (key type) parameter identifies the cryptographic algorithm family used with the key, such as "EC" for Elliptic Curve.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `kty`: Identifies the cryptographic algorithm family used with the key, such as "EC" for Elliptic Curve.
```

>   * use: The "use" (public key use) parameter identifies the intended use of the public key such as "sig" for signature.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `use`: Identifies the intended use of the public key, such as "sig" for signature.
```

>   * crv : The "crv" (Curve) parameter represents the elliptic curve-type and the hash-type such as "secp256k1" represents curve-type `secp256k1` and the hash-type `SHA-256`. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `crv` : Indicates the elliptic curve and the hash type (e.g., "secp256k1" represents curve-type `secp256k1` and the hash-type `SHA-256`). 
```

>   * x : Since we assume the "alg" parameter as "ES256K" which is one from the ECDSA family, so "x" parameter represents the X-coordinate of the corresponding public key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `x` : Indicates the X-coordinate of the corresponding public key. For "alg" parameter values of "ES256K" (which is from the ECDSA family), `x` contains the X-coordinate of the corresponding public key.
```

>   * y : Since we assume the "alg" parameter as "ES256K" which is one from the ECDSA family, so "y" parameter represents the Y-coordinate of the corresponding public key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  * `y` : Indicates the Y-coordinate of the corresponding public key. For "alg" parameter values of "ES256K" (which is from the ECDSA family), `y` contains the Y-coordinate of the corresponding public key.
```

                }
              }
      }

#### exp
The `exp` field is an optional field as described in [RFC7519][]. If used, it SHOULD be set to the expiration time of the cryptographic key used to generate the digital signature.

#### payId
The `payId` field is a required field. The value of `payId` field is the PayID URI in the client request that identifies the payment account information that the JSON object describes.

#### PayIDAddress
The `PayIDAddress` is a required field. The value of `PayIDAddress` field is a JSON object with the following keys: 

  * "expTime": This is an optionl field and follows the same structure as described for "exp" field in [RFC7519][]. If used, the value of `expTime` SHOULD be set to the maximum time upto which the payment address in the `address` field is valid.

  * "paymentNetwork": The value of the `paymentNetwork` is the value of payment-network string as specified in the client request's `Accept` header.

  * "environment": The value of `environment` string is the value of environment as specified in the client request's `Accept` header.

  * "addressDetailsType": The value of `addressDetailsType` is one of the following strings:

>        * CryptoAddressDetails

Reviewer: Should we provide context around what these mean (or maybe point back to [PAYID-PROTOCOL]?

Author: Yes, we can add a reference to [PAYID-PROTOCOL]

  * Wallets are not liable for any consequences coming from the loss, compromise or theft of customers' private keys.
  * The Non-custodial wallets do not require their customers to trust their servers in case wallets servers go malicious or are compromised.

  This extension of Basic PayID protocol preserves this trust model. Rather than requiring the PayID server to provide accurate PayID response for their customers, the PayID owners can generate these signed mappings with their own PayID private key locally on their app/device. The sender of the payment (PayID client wallet’s customer) can easily verify these signatures out-of-band with the receiver (i.e., PayID owner). This eliminates any risk of the non-custodial PayID server wallet losing its private keys, going malicious, getting hacked, or becoming otherwise compromised in a way that customers might lose funds.

> ## Using JWTs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Using JWS
```

Not really sure what this heading title should be, but I don't think JWT is used in this spec -- only JWS.

> The implementations of this extension of Basic PayID protocol MUST refer to the Security Considerations sections of [RFC7515][] and 

Reviewer: This portion appears to be incomplete (see dangling "and" at the end). 

Also, JWTs were specifically designed to (among other things) be used in HTTP headers and for authentication, whereas PayID responses using the JWS "JSON Serialization" are not expected to be used in that exact manner. All that to say, I don't think we can fully point to the security considerations of JWT (did you mean to reference JWS here instead?)

---
coding: utf-8

> title: Self-Sovereign Verifiable PayID

Reviewer: Let's rename the filename to `verifiable-payid-protocol-self-sov.md ` or something that doesn't have "NC"?

# Self-Sovereign Verifiable PayID Protocol Specification
  The Self-Sovereign Verifiable PayID protocol is designed along the same design principles as [PAYID-PROTOCOL][].

## PaymentInformation Resource as JSON Web Signatures
  The PayID Protocol [PAYID-PROTOCOL] defines a Payment Account(s) Information Resource that contains information about a particular PayID. This document further refines this definition to allow this information to be digitally signed, and then represented as a JSON Web Signature (JWS) [RFC7515] using JWS JSON Serialization.

  Below, this document further defines the structure of each JWS component, for the purposes of Self-Sovereign Verifiable PayID protocol.

### JOSE Protected Header
  For JWS, the members of the JSON object represented by the JOSE Header describe the cryptographic operations applied to the JWS Protected header and the JWS payload and optionally additional properties of the JWS.

>   For a complete list of members of this object, refer to [RFC7515][]. Following is an example of a JWT object representing JOSE header parameters for JWS JSON Serialization syntax.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  For a complete list of members of this object, refer to [RFC7515][]. Following is an example of a JWK object representing JOSE header parameters for JWS JSON Serialization syntax.
```
